in this video we're going to install the
sqlite three command line shell for
Windows computers now if you're using a
Mac or Linux machine
skip to the next video or the video
after that for your operating system but
if you're in Windows you're in the right
place so let's make a start
thing to keep in mind here is that
writing data base code straightaway
isn't the easiest way to learn about
sqlite and the sql language so
if you get errors have to work out if
it's the error or the errors in your
code or in the sql statement that
you've used so what we're going to do to
start is we're going to start by
installing the sqlite command line
shell so that we can create databases
and use sql commands without having
to worry about code yet on Windows the
sqlite command-line shell is an
executable file called sqlite 3
dot exe so in this video we're going
to see how to download that executable
add it to our computers path so that we
can use it
first things first we're going to go to
the sqlite website.....and
you can see at the top when get there there's
a download link so i'm going to click on
that now there is actually an installer
for sqlite and it's packaged
into a number of zip files the file we
want actually is a bundle up command
line tools for managing sqlite databases
you can see we've got one
here we got an osx version there and
down here we've got a windows version
here a bundle command line tools for
managing sqlite databases going to
click on that link now bearing in mind
that when you're watching this
video the version number may have
changed but that's alright if it's a
later version click on that one and
leave that downloading that's actually
finished it was quite a quick download I
do notice that the description for this file
includes links to the three executables
over here we've got to the command shell
sql diff . exe sqlite .
analyzer dot exe I suggest you bookmark
this page so that you can come back here
and check those links  in the future
but the tool we need at the moment is the
command line shell so what we need to do is
extract the contents of the zip file to
a suitable directory and then add that
directory to our path i'm going to do is
just
go to the folder where that does sqlite
file was opened and you can see
that I've actually got sqlite tools
there so I'm just going to extract all
extracted currently in that current path
for now it's quite quick because it's
only a small file but what I'm going to do
now I'm going to move these going
to right-click that the file that was
extracted i'm going to cut that
folder then what i'm going to do i'm
actually going to put this in my users
main home folder you can put
this in the program files directory or
somewhere else doesn't really matter but
for simplicity what I'm going to do is
just go to my local disk going to my
users and Tim which is the folder
that I'm going to put it I'm going to
actually save it in there but again the
choice is yours to where you want to
save it so i'm going to right click and do a
paste put in their and that's now the
folder and moved over and we
double-click it now to open the folder
what we can do up here is we can
actually come up here and click over
to the address bar and then click on
control c that's actually going to
take a copy of the path which we can use
to actually update to the path on the
computer now the instructions to set the
path start off slightly differently
depending on which version of windows
that you're using i'm using
Windows 10 here and if your
keyboards got a Windows key the quickest
way for all versions of windows is to
use windows and pause so hold down the
windows key press pause or
click pause that brings up this
window here otherwise we just need to
navigate to the control panel system and
security and system  on your version of
windows to get access to it and then
from here we can actually click on the
advanced system settings on the left so
i'm going to click on that that takes
you to the system properties dialog
which is we're all of the windows
version should already be so basically a
couple ways to get there but the bottom
line is you want to get to this location
and from here what we want to do is
click on environment variables and just a
quick note that if the some reason you
couldn't get there with the windows key
you can actually just right click the
my computer icon on your desktop and
choose properties and your there as well
alright so we're actually here now and
what we want to do is come down here to
where it's got the
edit button making sure that path is
selected over here under user variables
unless you really comfortable with doing
this leave the system variable section
down here at the bottom completely alone
if you mess up the system path variables
it can be really quite difficult to
recover windows you can get into
difficulty so just you don't touch
that area but under the user variable
they may or may not already be a path
variable as you can see here in my case
it already exists and actually got my
python installation actually in the path
but if you're is not there
you don't see a path variable you click
on new and you actually specify the
path names as path the word path and then
you type in the value paste in the
value like here so put those details in but
in my case because the path already
exists i'm going to click on edit
self path click on edit and
what we're going to do now is actually
add the path now this is actually
showing a new path variable being
created on Windows 10 if the editing an
existing path variable leave the name
unchange just add a semicolon to the
end of the previous value as a couple of
ways of doing it but this is the new way
on Windows 10 where youo click on new
just actually paste in the value
here alright for some reason the
control c that I did didn't
work so i'll just go back to the
Explorer again i can actually just go
into their we can make sure that that's
actually showing like that I think that's
what i did last time will control c
their or right-click and copy
if I want to that way to copy the entire
path now get back now to the system
environment variables area click on new and I can
paste it in and that's now the
variable that's been added so either way
whether you've got the option to do it
this way we've got an older way may just
be shown the entire path you've got the
old way
go to the end the end of the paths
settings that the various parts that are
defined in your system put a semicolon here and
paste in the values but in this case this is
a new way that Windows 10 does it where
you just select new and you enter another
value there click on ok and what's
happened now is that Windows 10 has
actually updated and environment
variables so click okay close it down i can
click on ok alright that
point the path now been set so what we
can do now is check that the sqlite
command line shell is working
the easiest way to do that is just
to come down to here you can either just
type in their it if it's under Windows 10 type cmd
alternatively you can actually click on
the right click on the windows startup
image down here right click and select
run and type CMD either way you get to
the command line prompt like you
can see the screen there and what we can
do is type....just to
verify that sqlite three is working
and you can see that it's actually
working actually came up and started up
for us and that's good and as we can see
that the things are now working nicely
and keep in mind you may see a slightly
different version number showing on the
screen to what I got here but that's ok so
long as it actually works
it means it's the sqlite command
line shell is now ready to go we can
start using that in future videos
alright so type .quit to get out of
sqlite three and type exit to close down
the command prompt window and this point
your good to go sqlite 3 is
installed on your Windows machine unless
you've got a mac and a linux machine also
you can actually skip the next two
videos and move on to start where we
actually start using sqlite 3 i'll
see you in the next video